Hippocampal atrophy and abnormal β-Amyloid (Aβ) deposition are established markers of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Nonetheless, longitudinal trajectory of Aβ-associated hippocampal subfield atrophy prior to dementia remains unclear. We hypothesized that elevated Aβ correlated with longitudinal subfield atrophy selectively in no cognitive impairment (NCI), spreading to other subfields in mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We analyzed data from two independent longitudinal cohorts of nondemented elderly, including global PET-Aβ in AD-vulnerable cortical regions and longitudinal subfield volumes quantified with a novel auto-segmentation method (FreeSurfer v.6.0). Moreover, we investigated associations of Aβ-related progressive subfield atrophy with memory decline. Across both datasets, we found a converging pattern that higher Aβ correlated with faster CA1 volume decline in NCI. This pattern spread to other hippocampal subfields in MCI group, correlating with memory decline. Our results for the first time suggest a longitudinal focal-to-widespread trajectory of Aβ-associated hippocampal subfield atrophy over disease progression in nondemented elderly.
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at:Hippocampal atrophy and abnormal β-Amyloid (Aβ) are characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD; Barnes et al., 2009; Jack Jr. et al., 2013) .
Evidence from animal models suggest that Aβ burden may affect hippocampal neurodegeneration via synaptic or neuronal dysfunctions (Busche et al., 2012; Busche & Konnerth, 2015; Masters, Cappai, Barnham, & Villemagne, 2006; Perez-Cruz et al., 2011) . Indeed, greater PET-Aβ burden was associated with smaller volume cross-sectionally Hanseeuw, Dricot, Lhommel, Quenon, & Ivanoiu, 2016; Mormino et al., 2009 ) and faster volume decline longitudinally in the whole hippocampus (Villemagne et al., 2013) in nondemented elderly. Nevertheless, lack of association between PET-Aβ and whole hippocampal atrophy was also found in cognitively normal elderly (Becker et al., 2011) . Given Aβ-associated hippocampal atrophy in nondemented elderly but not in patients with AD-dementia (Chetelat et al., 2010) , it may be implied that Aβ affects hippocampal degeneration more robustly in early disease stage while other pathologies contribute more in dementia stage. This is in line with the AD Pathological Cascade model (Jack Jr. et al., 2013) proposing that Aβ accumulation precedes hippocampal atrophy and both reach a plateau at dementia or earlier. Nonetheless, the longitudinal trajectory of Aβ-associated hippocampal atrophy in predementia remains unclear.
Notably, the hippocampus consists of several subfields (Bakker, Kirwan, Miller, & Stark, 2008; Small, Schobel, Buxton, Witter, & Barnes, 2011) . A review concluded selective subfield atrophy before dementia, more consistently in the CA1/subiculum (de Flores, La Joie, & Chetelat, 2015) . Few studies tested Aβ-associated subfield atrophy in nondemented elderly, showing smaller subiculum/hippocampal-tail/presubiculum in Aβ-positive no cognitive impairment (NCI; vs. Aβ-negative NCI) (Hsu et al., 2015) , and smaller CA1/subiculum in Aβ-positive mild cognitive impairment (MCI) compared with NCI (but no difference compared with Aβ-negative MCI) (La . These findings suggest selective hippocampal subfield atrophy related to Aβ in predementia.
However, previous studies relied on manual segmentation or earlier in-vivo atlas-based FreeSurfer approach (Hsu et al., 2015) , leading to hippocampal segmentation inaccuracy (Iglesias et al., 2015; Wisse, Biessels, & Geerlings, 2014) . Moreover, cross-sectional design and dichotomized Aβ-status prevented them from testing longitudinal trajectories of Aβ-associated subfield atrophy accurately. Therefore, we aimed to investigate how Aβ influence hippocampalsubfield atrophy in NCI/MCI longitudinally in two independent datasets, applying a novel ex-vivo ultra-high-resolution atlas-based automatic hippocampal segmentation (FreeSurfer v.6.0). We hypothesized Aβassociated longitudinal atrophy in selective subfields (e.g., CA1/ subiculum), spreading to other subfields over disease deterioration in nondemented elderly. Furthermore, we tested whether Aβ-associated progressive subfield atrophy correlated with memory decline.This study recruited participants from two independent datasets: After image quality control (see Section 2.4), 52 NCI and 77 MCI from the ADNI were included in the final cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses with annual follow-ups up to 4-years (Table 1) .
For the MACC dataset, 15 NCI and 76 MCI were included in the cross-sectional analyses. A subset of 12 NCI and 45 MCI who had two MRI scans were selected for the longitudinal analyses (Table 1; see Section 2.3 for MACC selection note). There was no difference in follow-up time between NCI and MCI for both datasets, although the follow-up time was in general shorter in the MACC dataset compared with the ADNI dataset (Table 1) .
This study was conducted in line with the Helsinki Declaration, and the MACC study was approved by the National Healthcare GroupBoard. All participants have provided written consent.In both datasets, the MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were performed. Regarding the MACC dataset, a locally validated neuropsychological assessment battery was administered to all participants, including two memory domains (verbal and visual memory), and five nonmemory domains (language, attention, executive function, visuoconstruction, and visuomotor speed) following our previous work (Ji et al., 2017; Vipin et al., 2018) . Standardized z-score for each domain was calculated following previous publication (Xu et al., 2015) .
A memory z-score was calculated by averaging the z-scores between the two memory domains for MACC. For ADNI, we used the ADNI memory z-score as validated by previous work (Crane et al., 2012) .For both datasets, whole-brain T1-weighted structural MRI images were collected using the Magnetization prepared rapid gradient recal- We compared the same group between datasets, with significance being indicated for MCI. size = 1 × 1 × 3 mm 3 , TR/TE/TI = 9000/82/2500 ms, flip angle = 180 , FOV = 232 × 256 mm 2 ).
The PET emission protocols were as follows: (a) ADNI dataset:
370 MBq 18 F-AV-45 injection was followed by dynamic imaging (four 5-min frames) from 50 to 70 min postinjection, and PET scan was performed within 28 days from the baseline MRI scan. Other scanning parameters depended on the scanner used at different sites, as described on the ADNI website (ADNI, 2011); (b) MACC dataset: PET scanning was performed on a Siemens Biograph mMR scanner (Delso et al., 2011) at the Clinical Imaging Research Centre (National University of Singapore, Singapore), 370 MBq 11 C-PIB injection was followed by static data acquisition from 40 to 70 min post injection (176 axial slices, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 3 mm 3 , FOV = 256 × 256 mm 2 ).
For MACC dataset, PET data were acquired per participant once during the whole longitudinal project. Therefore, we selected the MRI scan closest in time to the PET scan for the cross-sectional analysis (not necessarily baseline MRI scan, mean ± SD: 3.1 ± 7.3 months).
Given the slow Aβ accumulation (Villemagne et al., 2013) (Landau & Jagust, 2015) . A global SUVR score without applying PVC was also obtained.
For MACC PET data, motion correction was performed prior to tomographic reconstruction into a single static frame, using an in-house developed rebinner with rigid motion correction, binning into 20s frames (Reilhac et al., 2018) . Motion corrected images were reconstructed into a volume of 344 × 344 × 344 voxels (voxel size = 2.09 × 2.09 × 2.03 mm 3 )
using 3D Ordinary Poisson Ordered-subsets Expectation Maximization algorithm (Panin, Kehren, Michel, & Casey, 2006) with all corrections performed (including resolution modeling) and using three iterations and 21 subsets. Subsequently, same PetSurfer based preprocessing steps were applied as used for the ADNI dataset to obtain the global SUVR score, both with and without PVC. We used the global SUVR score for subsequent statistical analyses.Based on the preprocessed structural-images, a subject-specific atlas based longitudinal pipeline of automated hippocampal subfield segmentation (FreeSurfer v.6.0) was used to generate more sensitive subfield volume (Iglesias et al., 2016) . Since not all MACC baseline structural-images were used for longitudinal investigation (see Section 2.3), cross-sectional pipeline of hippocampal subfield segmentation (FreeSurfer v.6.0) (Iglesias et al., 2015) was applied for the MACC cross-sectional analysis, which was similar to the longitudinal pipeline without creating a subject-specific template. Importantly, both algorithms were based on a probabilistic atlas acquired from ultra-high resolution (~0.1 mm) ex vivo MRI data, showing significantly improved segmentation accuracy compared with previous method based on in vivo atlas from the earlier FreeSurfer v.5.3, and better alignment with previous histological studies (Iglesias et al., 2015; Iglesias et al., 2016) . Twelve subfields were obtained (Figure 1) , and we focused on the seven gray-matter subfields following previous studies (Ho et al., 2017) , including the granule cell layer of dentate gyrus (GCL), CA1, CA2/3, CA4, molecular layer (ML), hippocampal tail, and subiculum.
Bilateral volume was averaged per subfield for subsequent analyses. and repeating analyses using global SUVR without PVC. To facilitate results comparison between the two datasets, we also repeated the analysis for the ADNI dataset with the first 2-year follow-up data.
For all analyses, age and TIV were included as covariates, and statistical threshold was set at p ≤ .05. We applied Holm-Bonferroni multiple comparison correction for the number of subfields (n = 7).To provide more complete information, we also built separate cross- 3 | RESULTSThere were significant Aβ and time interaction in ADNI-participants (NCI: β = −1.38, p = .02; MCI: β = −4.09, p < .001) and MACC MCI group (β = −2.88, p = .05), but not in MACC NCI group (p = .13).
Regarding subfields, compared with the focal Aβ-related longitudinal volume decline in NCI, MCI exhibited more general involvement of subfields over time. Specifically, in ADNI MCI, Aβ-related progressive atrophy widely spread to all the subfields (ps ≤.05 after multiple comparison correction) ( Figure 2 , Table Se-2) . For MACC MCI, we found longitudinal atrophy in the CA1 (β = −.50, p = .014), ML (β = −.53, p = .027), and the subiculum (trend-wise, β = −.38, p = .051; Figure 2 , Regarding cognitively normal individuals, we found progressive volume decline in the CA1 (β = −.21, p = .028), CA4 (β = −.14, p = .024), HIP tail (β = −.34, p = .027), ML (β = −.25, p = .018), and GCL (β = −.16, p = .023) that were modulated by Aβ in ADNI NCI group (Figure 3 , Table Se -4) . In MACC NCI, we replicated the findings of Aβ-associated CA1 volume decline (β = −.55, p = .046; Figure 3 , Figure Se-1, 2) . Also, as expected, MCI showed smaller subfield volume in all subfields than NCI crosssectionally for both datasets (Table Se-10).We found significant memory decline in MACC-participants (NCI: β = −.05, p = .002; MCI: β = −.03, p = .003), but not in ADNIparticipants (ps > .05). However, Aβ-associated longitudinal subfield atrophy was related to memory deterioration in MCI for both MACC (Figure 4 ; ps ≤.05 for the CA1 and ML after multiple comparison correction) and ADNI (ps ≤.05 after multiple comparison correction; F I G U R E 3 Faster volume decline in the CA1 with greater Aβ burden in NCI across datasets. Similar between the ADNI dataset and MACC dataset (denoted by orange color), higher level of Aβ was associated with faster atrophy in the CA1 (a). Differently (denoted by blue color), NCI participants in the ADNI dataset also presented faster atrophy in the CA4, HIP tail, ML, and GCL (b). Data were divided into three approximately equal-sized groups in terms of the logtransformed SUVR scores, represented by the solid line (upper tercile), dark gray dotted line (middle tercile), and the light gray dotted line (lower tercile). Hippocampal subfields in orange represented overlapping patterns, while those in blue represented distinct patterns between the two datasets. None survived Holm-Bonferroni multiple comparison correction. Abbreviations: GCL, granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus; HIP tail, hippocampal tail; ML, molecular layer; NCI, no cognitive impairment F I G U R E 4 Progressive hippocampal subfield atrophy was associated with faster memory decline over time in MACC MCI. For hippocampal subfields that showed progressive atrophy in association with Aβ, faster decline in volume in these subfields correlated to faster memory decline in MCI for the MACC dataset, as well as ADNI dataset (described in text, and not shown in figure) . All survived Holm-Bonferroni multiple comparison correction, except a trend-wise effect in the subiculum (p = .07). Data were divided into three approximately equal-sized groups in terms of the hippocampal subfields volume, represented by the light gray solid line (upper tercile), dotted line (middle tercile), and the black solid line (lower tercile). Abbreviations: MCI, mild cognitive impairment; ML, molecular layer 4.1 | Focal-to-widespread progressive hippocampal subfield atrophy over time with greater Aβ burden in nondemented elderly Importantly, both datasets consistently showed Aβ-associated longitudinal atrophy progression in the CA1, ML, and subiculum. The CA1and subiculum are key regions of the hippocampal circuit, being associated with input integration and memory retrieval, respectively (Small et al., 2011) . Also, smaller ML has been correlated with poorer performance in memory retrieval (Zheng et al., 2018) . Altogether, it may be implied that progressive atrophy in the CA1, ML, and subiculum relates to impaired memory functioning. That volume decline in these subfields correlated with memory decline in MCI lent further support.
Moreover, more widespread Aβ-associated atrophy progression in ADNI MCI (versus MACC MCI) was not due to its longer follow-up ( (den Heijer et al., 2012) , which has been suggested to be Aβ-independent (Vemuri et al., 2015) . Indeed, MACC MCI subsample after excluding those with more severe WMH showed Aβ-associated volume decline in the same subfields, but to a stronger extent. Future studies need to investigate the relationship between Aβ, individual cerebrovascular markers, and hippocampal subfield atrophy. In contrast to the observed widespread volume decline in MCI, NCI showed subtle volume decline in the CA1 selectively across both datasets.
Interestingly, CA1 atrophy has also been observed in other disorders (e.g., bipolar disorder (Bearden et al., 2008) , and schizophrenia (Ho et al., 2017) ), suggesting a general CA1 vulnerability.
Taken together, we propose that Aβ-associated subfield atrophy progression takes the form of a focal-to-widespread pattern as disease progresses from NCI to MCI. The AD Pathological Cascade model (Jack Jr. et al., 2013) and Amyloid/Tau/Neurodegeneration AD biomarkers system (Jack Jr. et al., 2016) have highlighted the role of individual AD biomarkers. Our results underscore the importance of associations between individual biomarkers, potentially leading to a better understanding of the underlying disease mechanism.Although the underlying neurotoxic mechanism of Aβ remains controversial, it has been suggested that Aβ induces synaptic loss and impairs neuronal function, resulting in neurodegeneration (Masters et al., 2006) . Our study replicated previous findings of neocortex Aβhippocampal atrophy association in nondemented elderly (Chetelat et al., 2010; Mormino et al., 2009 ). This could not be contributed to hippocampal Aβ deposition (Chetelat et al., 2010) , which is none or low in early stage (Thal, Rub, Orantes, & Braak, 2002) . Several possibilities may be proposed. Specifically, key cortical regions for earliest Aβ deposition (e.g., PCC/precuneus, orbital frontal; Palmqvist et al., 2017 ) could connect to hippocampus via white matter tracts (e.g., from the orbital frontal via uncinate fasciculus, and from the PCC/retrosplenial via cingulum; Greicius, Supekar, Menon, & Dougherty, 2009; Vipin et al., 2019) . This implies a structural pathway where abnormal Aβ may modulate. Indeed, Aβ has been associated with longitudinal impairment of white matter integrity before dementia (Vipin et al., 2019) . Also, reduced precuneus-hippocampus functional connectivity has been found in nondemented participants with positive Aβ compared with those with negative Aβ (Sheline et al., 2010) , providing a potential functional pathway. Notably, we showed that regional Aβ burden in these regions was associated with memory decline especially in MCI patients (Table Se- 12) . We did not find global Aβ-memory decline association, which was in line with previous animal/human literature (i.e., association between global Aβ and cognition was generally absent or weak if any; Chetelat et al., 2012; Foley, Ammar, Lee, & Mitchell, 2015) . Our findings may indicate a possible region-specific influence of Aβ on longitudinal memory decline. Nonetheless, future work is needed to study the spatiotemporal relationship between regional Aβ, hippocampal subfield degeneration, and memory decline in longer follow-up period. Another possibility links to soluble Aβ that precedes Aβ plaques formation, and has been suggested to affect hippocampal neurodegeneration via disturbing synaptic processing based on transgenic mice model of AD (Perez-Cruz et al., 2011) . Soluble Aβ has also been shown to induce hippocampal neuronal hyperactivity at early disease stage in transgenic AD mice, which has been hypothesized to be associated with neuronal dysfunction and cell death at a later stage (Busche et al., 2012; Busche & Konnerth, 2015) .
Furthermore, given the association between tau deposition and atrophy in the whole hippocampus or hippocampal subfields (Apostolova et al., 2015) , hippocampal subfield atrophy might be contributed by hippocampal tau deposition, which coincides with neocortex Aβ accumulation in early stage (Braak, Alafuzoff, Arzberger, Kretzschmar, & Del Tredici, 2006) . Supporting preliminary evidence from ADNI MCI group suggested that Aβ-associated progressive hippocampal subfield atrophy was more pronounced in MCI with p-tau positivity, but not in MCI with p-tau negativity (Table Se- 14) . Further systematic investigation into the interactions between region-specific tau and Aβ deposition and their impact on neurodegeration over time is needed using tau-PET method (Hall et al., 2017) .
Regarding the selective CA1 volume decline in NCI, the CA1 has more than 21 types of inhibitory interneurons (Klausberger & Somogyi, 2008) , and CA1 interneurons reduction has been found in transgenic AD mice (Takahashi et al., 2010) . This might lead to an excitation-inhibition imbalance in the CA1, being associated with synaptic dysfunction and neuronal loss. The largest number of neurons (West & Gundersen, 1990) and capillaries (Lokkegaard, Nyengaard, & West, 2001) as estimated in the CA1 (vs. other subfields) might also contribute. Altogether, we propose that the CA1 atrophy represents a general and early vulnerability to AD and the atrophy spreads to other subfields over time via possible mechanisms as mentioned above. Although we could not pinpoint the exact neocortex Aβ-hippocampal atrophy pathway(s), our result replications in two datasets provide convincing evidence for the focal-towidespread pattern of Aβ-associated subfield atrophy over time.There were some limitations. Firstly, MACC-dataset had fewer NCI (n = 15) than ADNI-dataset (n = 52). However, similar results were observed between datasets. Secondly, other variables may also contribute to hippocampal subfield atrophy and disease progression (e.g., tau pathology and cerebrovascular factors) in addition to Aβ (Apostolova et al., 2015; den Heijer et al., 2012) . Future studies need to take into consideration the spatial quantification of Aβ instead of an average Aβ burden, and determine the contributing variables and the temporal relationships underlying disease progression. Finally, it would be interesting to test how Aβ affects the hippocampus along the anterior-posterior axis in predementia stages.To conclude, converging results from two independent datasets showed that greater Aβ burden correlated with selective CA1 volume decline in NCI and longitudinal atrophy extension into other subfields in MCI, resulting in a focal-to-widespread longitudinal trajectory.
Moreover, the Aβ-associated progressive subfield atrophy correlated with memory decline in MCI, hence, potentially serving as imaging markers for disease progression monitoring.We thank all the participants for their contributions to the study. Other coauthors report no potential conflicts of interest.De-identified data are available upon requests from the corresponding authors.
ORCID Juan H. Zhou https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0180-8648